13 Mar 2017Play your part by raising awareness and promoting human rights In this month of March, Government calls on South Africans to play their part  in raising awareness and promoting basic human rights, in their communities, workplaces, government institutions and places of worship in line with the theme: The year of OR Tambo: Unity in Action in Advancing Human Rights. The year 2017 is the centenary of Oliver Reginald Tambo, a struggle stalwart who was an advocate for human rights, social cohesion and nation building.  His values of freedom, racial tolerance and respect for humanity should be emulated by all who want to see this country moving forward. Provinces will engage in different activities throughout the month leading to the bigger national commemorative event - Human Rights Day on the 21st of March 2017. The event will be held at Victoria Sports Grounds in King Williams Town, Eastern Cape, where President Zuma is expected to address the nation. This venue has a special historical significance as it is a place where the funeral of the late human rights activist, Steve Bantu Biko was held 40 years ago. In recognition of the contribution made by Steve Biko in the liberation of the people of South Africa and to mark 40 years of his passing, President Zuma is expected to lay a wreath at his burial site in the morning of the 21st of March 2017. Nation building is a process that we must all commit to nurture and defend continuously. Therefore, all South Africans are encouraged to participate and support a number of social cohesion dialogues hosted by the Department of Arts and Culture in various provinces throughout the month. Donald Liphoko, the Government Spokesperson said “Let each and every one of us commit to the values of OR Tambo by combating all forms of racial intolerance and promoting basic human rights in the places where we live”. For more information on Human Rights Month and related activities visit the following websites and follow conversations and updates on Twitter and Facebook accounts listed below. Twitter accounts: @GovernmentZA @ArtsCultureSA @GCISMedia @SANews Enquiries:Donald LiphokoActing Government SpokespersonCell: 082 901 0766 Issued by Government Communication and Information System