24 March 2017Minister of Communications, Faith Muthambi, condemns the violence against women as reported in the media. Government is appalled and shocked by reports of horrific and unacceptable acts of violence and sexual assault faced by two women whilst commuting in taxis in Johannesburg. Further to this, women in Delft and Mthatha have been victims of taxi violence. We must work together to ensure that the public transport system is a safe environment for women who depend on this vital infrastructure to participate in the economy.Minister Muthambi said: We call on society at large to work with law enforcement agencies to bring the perpetrators to book. Violence and abuse against women is a violation of our human rights and government reiterates its call to report all cases of rape, sexual assault or any form of gendered violence to the police. Our criminal justice system and our courts should be assisted by citizens to tackle those who commit violence and abuse. Society should strengthen the role men must play in realizing the change we want to see in our communities. With our support, men can put an end to abuse, assault, rape and domestic violence against women and children. The intensity of violence against women indicates that some men disregard the lives of women. Men must lead the change we want to see in our communities. Our communities need men who will confront societal flaws and take up the fight against women abuse. We call on responsible father figures to instill the values of human dignity, equality and respect in young men and boys. The voices of men are crucial in the fight against violence and abuse, added Muthambi. We call on all South Africans to do more to prevent violence against women, support survivors of abuse and bring perpetrators to justice, said Muthambi. Government will remain steadfast in protecting women s rights as a hard won Constitutional victory, built on the sacrifices of women of all walks of life in our liberation journey.Enquiries: Donald Liphoko Cell: 082 901 0766 E-mail: donaldl@gcis.gov.zaIssued by Government Communications (GCIS)