31 March 2017The Justice Crime Prevention and Security (JCPS) Cluster welcomes the Gauteng High Court sentencing against Admore Ndlovu, Thabo Nkala and Mduduzi Mathibela who were found guilty of guilty of murder, rape and robbery. The trio were sentenced to four life sentences each on Friday, 31 March 2017.In 2015 the trio drowned two men and gang raped their partners and robbed them of their belongings at Rhodes Park. Acting Minister of Justice and Conrrectional Services, Ms Faith Muthambi said: We applaud the efforts of the law enforcement agencies, the prosecuting authority and the judiciary. Despite the long-wait for justice, the families of the victims can rest assured that no stone was left unturned in the case. We give credit to the forensic team and investigators for their skill and expertise which brought finality to this matter. We are optimistic that this soundproof verdict will convey a strong messages and serve as a deterrent to other perpetrators. The Criminal Justice System will continue with its fight against crime including abuse but it is time that all members of society including NGOs, the business community amongst others come together to rid the nation of criminal activities. Government will not allow rape and murder to continue and we remain confident that law enforcement agencies will bring perpetrators to book and face the full wrath of the law. Society needs to change their mindset about the dignity to life and respect for each other. As indicated in the National Development Plan safety is a core human right and we need to work together to achieve Vision 2030 wherein all people are and feel safe, added Minister Muthambi. We reiterate the call on members of the public to continue partnering with government in creating a safer and healthier environment for our communities to thrive. By working together we move South Africa forward. Enquiries: Mthunzi Mhaga Cell: 083 641 8141Issued by: Government Communication and Information System (GCIS) on behalf of the JCPS Cluster