20 April 2017 Government welcomes the A.T. Kearney’s 2017 Foreign Direct Investment Confidence report, which indicates that South Africa is the 25th most attractive destination for foreign direct investment global, the first from the African Continent. Improvements in short-term economic prospects and the long-term investment in the country’s manufacturing have been cited as some of the key drivers of South Africa’s improved rating on the Index. Minister of Communications, Ayanda Dlodlo said:  “Government is humbled by this ranking, which shows that South Africa’s strategic partnership with foreign investors is gaining momentum. The report demonstrates that our country’s blueprint on development is yielding results and requires that we strengthen this with also encouraging South Africans to save so that we balance this show of confidence through involving South Africans. South Africa is considered as a gateway to Africa, with lucrative value and opportunities for international investor partnerships, boasting a combination of infrastructure and an emergent market economy that gives rise to a vibrant and entrepreneurial investment environment.” As part of strengthening our economic diplomatic efforts, South Africa will be hosting an incoming Chinese delegation that will be led by Vice Premier Liu Yandong with his South African counterpart, Arts and Culture Minister Nathi Mthethwa on the 24 April 2017 at the OR Tambo Building at Dirco. The visit is aimed at strengthening the People – to People Exchange pillar of our strategic relations with China which have largely been defined by Government to government co- operation, Business to business engagement and with introducing the ‘ People – to People Exchange; this development completes the full cycle. We hope to see various sectors such as women, youth, academics, media etc co- operating on a whole range of issues aimed at bringing meaningful expression to the notion of Freedom. As South Africa, we welcome this development and view it as a ‘qualitative advance in the South Africa – China relations because we acknowledge that people to people relations are a core element of the glue that binds societies together’ said Minister Dlodlo. In the current phase this show of confidence bodes well for our efforts aimed at strengthening economic relations with many regions of the world, which recently saw South Africa hosting delegations from Qatar and Estonia. In this regard, South Africa has heeded President Jacob Zuma’s call to focus on changing any negative perceptions held by foreign investors by strengthening synergies within civil society. We are also optimistic that the current UK – US Investor Roadshow led by Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba will bolster these efforts. South Africa remains a destination of choice. More than 10 million international tourists arrived in South Africa this past year, a 13% increase to the previous year. This is more than the global average growth rate for the period. Enquiries: Phumla WilliamsCell: 083 501 0139 Donald Liphoko Cell: 082 901 0766 Issued by: Government Communication and Information System (GCIS)