11 January 2017 Government is deeply saddened by reports of the death of four children after a bus and minibus taxi collided in Ntuzuma, KwaZulu-Natal this morning. According to media reports, 13 people were injured in the incident. Acting GCIS Director-General, Donald Liphoko said; “Government conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved families. We are saddened by the unfortunate loss of lives in this tragic incident. We wish all injured a speedy recovery.” Liphoko added; “Yesterday, the nation heard the Minister of Transport, Dipuo Peters, reveal the high number of lives that were tragically lost during the festive season. Road crashes and fatalities increased by 5% for the 2016/17 festive season to 1 714, compared to the 2015/16 period. As individuals and as a nation we need to stop tolerating and accepting negligent and irresponsible behaviour on our roads. We need to work with the authorities to curb the high number of deaths on the roads. The loss of one life, is one too many.” In May 2015, government published regulations which compels passengers in motor vehicles to wear seatbelts and drivers to ensure that children under the age of three years are placed on car seats or child restraints whenever they are transported on public roads. “We call on all motorists to abide by these and other laws of the road in order to avoid the loss of life, injury, loss of income and assets that result from incidents on our roads. In the 3rd National Road Safety Summit, held in November 2016, it was revealed that negative impact of road crashes to the economy translated to 3.4% of South Africa’s GDP. The economic impact of accidents and road deaths play a significant part towards achieving the National Development’s Plan Vision 2030 which seeks to bolster the economy and address unemployment, poverty and inequality,” said Liphoko. As a country we need to work harder to achieve the goal of the Decade of Action for Road Safety which is to curb the carnage on the roads by half before 2020. “Government calls on all road users to play their part in moving South Africa forward by being responsible on the roads and reducing the high number of deaths. Road safety is everyone’s responsibility. As we begin the New Year let us commit to obeying the rules, reducing our speed, and not drinking and texting while driving”, said Liphoko. Enquiries: Donald LiphokoCell: 082 901 0766E-mail: donaldl@gcis.gov.za Issued by Government Communications (GCIS)