 24 February 2017On Saturday, 25 February 2017, government will embark on the National Development Plan (NDP) back to school Imbizo under the theme Together we move South Africa Forward: Making our future work . The Imbizo seeks to send a clear message that South Africa is serious about education and that it is at the apex of government priorities.The NDP Post SoNA Back to School Imbizo calls for the implementation of a joint national initiative. It is envisaged that Members of Cabinet will lead district based Imbizo activations to engage citizens on issues in the education sector. The NDP further envisions a South Africa where everyone has access to education of the highest quality, leading to significantly improved outcomes and a prosperous life.Izimbizo are a two-way unmediated and interactive information sharing platforms, a dialogue between government and people giving credibility to a participatory democracy. Learners, Principals, Teachers, Lecturers and Parents are encouraged to participate in the Izimbizo from their respective areas.This will also give citizens the opportunity to address challenges and concerns they are facing in the education system. Given that successful schools and higher education institutions will also be amongst those visited, the Izimbizo will celebrate successes and best practices in the quest for education as a key to growth and development.Some of the events that will take place include the following:Saturday, 25 February 2017. Minister in The Presidency Jeff Radebe will lead the National Development Plan (NDP) Post SoNA Back to School Imbizo in Ntuzuma, KwaMashu, KwaZulu- Natal @10h00.Saturday, 25 February 2017. Deputy Minister Andries Nel will visit the Youth Centre in Bavianspoort Correctional Centre as part of Government Imbizo programme. The Deputy Minister will interact with offenders who are currently studying at the centre. Learners at this centre achieved a 100% matric pass rate. The event is taking place at Emthonjeni Youth Centre, Baviaanspoort Correctional Centre, Gauteng @11h00Saturday, 25 February 2017. Deputy Minister Obed Bapela will visit the Gert Sibande TVET College, Evender Campus - Mpumalanga Province @12h00 as part of the Education Imbizo programme.Saturday, 25 February 2017. Minister of Basic Education Angie Motshekga will visit Phillipi: Sophumelele High School in the Western Cape.Acting Director-General of GCIS Mr Donald Liphoko said It is crucial to engage in dialogues with citizens, civil society and address challenges in education sector. Education is the number one priority of government. The National Development Plan (NDP) identifies improving education, training and innovation as some of the key elements in creating better and more prosperous South Africa by 2030. The NDP envisages South Africa where everyone has access to education of the highest quality, leading to significantly improved outcomes. The attainment of vision 2030 requires a special focus on quality childhood development, basic education and higher education and training. Government encourages all active citizens to participate in the dialogues between senior government officials and communities across the country, in addressing education sector challenges and progress in order to improve and provide better education for all. Liphoko added.Enquires: Donald Liphoko Cell: 082 901 0766Members of the public are encouraged to follow the national Imbizo on education and share their own successes, educational tips and ideas as follows:Issued by Government Communication and Information System (GCIS)